So we're talking to Mr. Bill Moyers, and congratulations, sir.
Thank you.
I'm interested in the decision of the journalist to go out and write about something that is so subjective.
It's not abstract, really, as poetry.
And we'll discuss it in a general manner like that if we can.
Yeah, ever since I started in public broadcasting 25 years ago, I had taken as my mandate what Benjamin Harris said was his mandate in the first newspaper in America called Public Occurrences, Both Foreign and Domestic, in 1691.
And he said his mandate was to give an account of such considerable things as have come to my attention.
As a journalist, that's what I try to do.
We journalists are licensed to explain things they don't understand, and there's a lot I don't understand.
So I like to go out, become a good student, gather the information, sort it out, weigh it, evaluate it, and then share it with a larger audience.
I look for things that interest me.
But as a journalist, and I hope a reasonably good journalist, I look for what's happening out there that I might not have known about.
And what I see as a journalist is an enormous resurgence across America.
in poetry and performance poetry in particular.
Amazing.
Yeah.
It is fascinating.
The New York Times said recently, poetry's come out of the smoky cafes into the street.
The New York Daily News had an emblazoned headline, let's not mince words, poetry's big.
Yeah, it's all in there.
The New York Times just last week had a huge spread on the phenomenon of poetry.
So something's going on out there that any good journalist, particularly one who takes as his beat the world of ideas, has to take notice of, has to take note of.
And so this is really an effort.
Actually, poetry is not as subjective as the layman thinks.
Poetry is very precise.
It's concrete.
Poets labor for the specific word in order to incarnate
a feeling, to give flesh to.
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was made flesh.
And poets give flesh to ideas, flesh to feelings, flesh to emotions, flesh to curiosity.
And so it's very specific, and that's what I hope people grasp when they watch the series, which is on June 23rd, or when they read this.
That's very important.
Yeah.
I don't mean to interrupt.
No, that's all right.
I am...
I've syndicated myself over the last year and was really 23 newspapers.
Good.
I just started in Austin, Texas.
Austin American States.
American States.
I just went to Tallahassee and Charlottesville, a really targeted university of towns.
I mean, Eugene, Oregon, Gainesville.
Good.
Knoxville, Gainesville, Charlottesville.
Good readers in those cities.
That's what I've really mindfully done at.
Good idea.
And it's working, you know.
Fingers crossed.
Good.
But in any case, this is kind of— June 23rd is when the series aired.
There's a great—television can serve books and vice versa, and I've shown that with Giff Campbell and The Power of Myth and Healing in the Mind and The World of Ideas.
But in this case, I'm documenting something.
It's not just that I've gone out because I love poetry, which I do.
I've even written some poetry I can understand.
You mentioned your wife is a poet as well.
Yes, she is.
It's a better poet than some, I know.
I just noticed something happening.
If you were a journalist walking down the street and you saw a crowd around an automobile, you'd run over to it and cover the wreck.
And I see something out there that needs covering.
And that's really what this series and this book are trying to do, to document an amazing renaissance.
The biggest renaissance, I think,
since the beat generation in the 50s.
Now, I'm quite impressed by the balance, the cultural balance that you sought out and represented in here.
Was that important for you to really try and represent the full spectrum of... Well, it was important for me as a journalist to report what is actually happening.
And what is happening is that
an enormous range of voices are now getting heard through poetry.
Ethnic poets, cowboy poets, Native American poets, Vietnam veteran poets, Persian Gulf veteran poets, gay poets, feminist poets, men's movement poets, African American poets.
And that's the, as I say in the foreword of the book, that's the great democratic crucible in which our new identity is being forged in the language of these
new Americans who are contributing their idiom and their ideas to the American League.
What do we have in common except language?
And this new language that's being created, coming from these varieties of people, is giving democracy new vitality and the democratic conversation new vitality.
However, I didn't choose these books, these poets, arbitrarily.
I covered, we covered in our television series, the Dodge Poetry Festival in Waterloo, New Jersey.
And it's the festival that brings these poets from all over the country from many tributaries of culture and experience and persuasion and identity to Waterloo every other year to perform before thousands of people, including thousands of young people.
So I'm there with my cameras to document
What others have identified is, who know more about poetry than I do, is happening in the country.
That's why there's such a diversity.
I'm really impressed with so many of the people that I just, Marley, just sent the book over here at my hotel, so you'll have to forgive me for having to send me the whole thing.
I do that, too.
I promise you that by the time we write the piece later this week, it'll be thorough.
But I'm really impressed by what I've read.
of how so many of these poets actually think of imagery.
It's not just the imagery that shows up in the written word.
When you ask them a question, you depict these stunning images.
I have to get which poet it is.
The words become formless after a while, and you really just have to give them an invigorating.
Yes, Stan McHughness.
He says that after a while, we wear words down.
They exhaust.
They are exhausted, and we have to then go deep to fight
to define them again and give them a new power, to resurrect them and send them marching off in the service of our intelligence and our emotions.
You also asked Manley, it is interesting that nobody does commit contemporary poetry or memory anywhere.
That is quite a departure from them.
When we were going to school, we memorized them.
Well, that's a consequence of the media culture, I'm sure, in which the heavy lifting is done by someone else.
I mean, television does your work for you.
People are not accustomed to listening as much as they used to.
You don't have to cock your ears, you just have to turn on your set.
Language has moved from the street to the set, to the radio.
to the audio cassette, to the desk, to the rock and roll, to the rap, to the sitcom, to the news.
We have surrogate listeners now, and they go in here and package and present to us, and we're not being trained in the harnessing of the monomic powers for our own benefit, the way you and I were when we were growing up.
required memorization from us, not because they expected us to love poetry, but because they wanted us to sharpen the tools of our intelligence.
And memory was the best real sergeant you could enlist for that purpose.
But even then, so many poems, as you mentioned, again, with Coons, and I didn't keep running that.
Well, he's one of my, he's a giant.
And I have corresponded with him and talked about it.
And he actually, in a letter he wrote to me, he said, well, I kind of had your job once upon a time.
Very nice, very classy print.
But you mentioned at the beginning of my talk how this is a great renaissance, and poetry is going through a great renaissance.
Were you fearful when you started this that perhaps poetry, after all these thousands of years, has been so central for the lives of every culture?
I mean, a poet has always been a sustained, honored, revered person, and that
for whatever causes this more or less had fallen out.
Now you see it coming back.
Were you fearful that the role of the poet, the function of the poet, has perhaps been disappearing?
I was concerned that the poet was being exiled to the margins, particularly to the academic world, where poetry was subjected to the kind of deconstruction that took the life out of it.
and said it is less than its parts.
I was concerned that poetry was becoming just an exotic wrestling match for linguistic scholars and not something for the rest of us, not something that was about life.
I did a series back in 1908 called The Power of the Word, which was also about poets.
It was the first series David Rubin and I did on poets, although I have done many individual poets in my 25 years in broadcasting, from the first television interview Maya Angelou did back in 1973, to Robert Finn Warren, to Archibald MacLeish, who was one of my favorites, now sort of forgotten and ignored, but he'll be back, mark my word, when cultural historians look at this last 50 years of American life.
And I was concerned that poetry, like art, had lost its touch, had become the token of collectors and not the passion of ordinary people like art was.
You lost its relevance, isn't it?
Yeah, lost its relevance.
I had, although I kept finding people who admitted to writing poetry but not letting anyone read it.
And I kept running it.
I was here in Chicago one night about four years ago.
at a hotel down the street, came back from a dinner meeting, got back to the hotel about 10 o'clock, and I was, you know, picked up a weekly newspaper that was distributed in the hotel, looked at it, and it said that in a former bar just down the street, Portia was being read every Friday night.
So it was Friday night.
I walked down there three or four blocks, went in.
It was amazing what I encountered.
The place was full of people listening, of verbalizers and
people would stand up, recite their own poem, and then people would judge it.
They would get up and create poetry in response to it.
Some people would get up and read poetry they'd written 30 years ago, or get up and read their favorite poems from one of the, you know, from Tennyson or Shelley.
It was an amazing, dazzling display.
of language in the lives of ordinary people in that poem.
When you talk to these individual poets, were you hopeful of getting some kind of sense and grasp on the creative process?
And if that was involved, tell me some of the things that we learned.
What's unique about the book, I think, is that for the first time you have the interviews intercut with the poems themselves.
You often read Partisan Review, Partisan Review,
any of the other poetry journals, and they'll simply have the poetry printed there, or they'll have an interview with the poet.
But we have connected the two so that you can begin to see where an image begins to form in the mind of a poet, what life experience informs that poet, how it is that a poet looks at a tree and sees something you and I don't see, or looks at a common object like a grapefruit,
and gets out of it what Gerald Stern got out of it in his poem about a grapefruit.
I never eat grapefruit at home now in my apartment in New York without thinking of Gerald Stern with his hand up raised, squeezing that grapefruit.
You begin to see that the gift of the poet is to make connections that most of us miss, and you begin to see how the world looks to a poet.
It's not at all together
like it looks to us, until the poet describes it for us, and then we say, yes, that's exactly what I've done.
The juxtaposition is, of course, really wonderful.
I mean, you wrote a poem, and then I don't recall who the woman is, but you asked about a line, a fleckle poem.
Yeah.
We have that here, and then you go right into the Q&A aspects of it.
I think it really does give you a nice sense of the product and the process.
You begin to get a—you begin to see how they create it, but the creative—
furnace in a person is not some ancient mystical fire that's burning there that is not available to the rest of it.
It's a matter of concentration.
It's a matter of comparison and analogy.
It's a matter of deliberately focusing and thinking through what you see, of being open to metaphors, so that
people who are amateur poets can improve their own poetry by paying attention to people who do it primarily for themselves.
I guess they are.
Some of the superstars really can make a living as poets.
Not a lot of them.
Yeah, that's probably right.
Who was it who said poets are made, not paid?
That's right.
So is there a professional poet in our culture?
I mean, are there people who can actually, I hate to use such a crass phrase, make a living, but actually be professional poets?
Or is it something that you need in addition to or as collateral to be too?
Even the best poets who write a lot of poetry have to do other things.
Donald Hall writes children's books,
teaches, lectures some.
They don't make much for the lectures, but they can be adjunct professor at a university for a while.
But I don't know of a single poet, and I'm sure there are some, but I don't know any, who make a living just writing poetry.
If it weren't for grants, and this is changing, by the way.
Readings are beginning to bring poets more income, although it also runs the risk of exhausting them, because
As you'll see when the eight films run, it's an exhaustive experience.
Good poetry requires good audiences.
The audience and the poet fuse in this experience so that the energy that's drained out of a poet in attending to the insatiable, emotional,
magnetism of an audience is exhausting.
And I see these poets actually give everything they have, and it's very tiny.
But here's the interesting thing about poetry.
This is the anomaly.
The very fact that poets don't make a living from their poetry in part accounts for the powerful honesty of poets.
They are not writing for pay.
They're not like politicians going to be rewarded by the applause of the crowd.
They're not like advertising trying to say something.
There is no income attached to poetry, so poets are free to speak what is in their hearts.
And they often do write the truth because they are liberated by penury.
to speak truth.
It's the most honest, as I say, it's the most honest language I hear today.
And I don't know of anybody who's speaking the truth about America, better than poets.
Adrian Rich's poems in here are discussions about what's happening to democracy.
People who depend on public popularity don't speak the truth that often.
That's why we don't get much of it from politicians.
Did you do most of these interviews at the festival?
That was really great.
That was very convenient then, wasn't it?
You really didn't have to be stretching the... Oh, thank you.
Appreciate it.
And it was fortunate, too, Nick, because I was just three months away from bypass surgery.
The 15th of April, I had an unexpected brush with mortality.
Thank you.
Thirty minutes away from what they later said would have been a massive heart attack.
So I had to bypass surgery, and...
Three months later, I almost didn't do the series for two reasons.
One, I hadn't raised the money for it by the time I had the bypass surgery.
Then after I had the bypass surgery, I sort of lost my energy for a while and couldn't get out and raise the money.
And my wife, who really designed this book, and I was sitting on the terrace of our home in New Jersey.
We'd raised maybe two-thirds of the money before my operation for the Fortress Series and couldn't get the rest of it.
And I just, I was ready to give up.
I said, no, we were four weeks from the festival on the 18th of September.
This was early August.
And I've had some of these books, and I was reading through them.
I told them at breakfast, I said, I'm not going to do the series.
It's just, we can't get the money.
It's going to be too much.
I'm tired.
I need to really recover.
And I picked up Naomi's little, one of Naomi's little volumes that has in it The Art of Disappearing.
And I read it, and then I came to this last line, sitting on the terrace of my house in New Jersey, walk around feeling like a leaf, know you could tumble any second, then decide what to do with your time.
I read that to my wife, and she said, you know, we don't have much time.
We ought to do that seriously.
We've got to do that seriously.
Well, I was inspired.
I went to the phone, called a fellow I hadn't thought of in a good while who runs a small foundation in Boston,
They came up with the extra $400,000, and we were able to do the series four weeks later.
So I did go out there and interview 18 poets over the course of the festival.
And they are part, although not all, of this book.
Some of these poems, poets, are from my first series, The Power of the Word.
Others are single hours I've done with Rita Dove and Donald Hall and Jane Kenyon and people like that.
Oh, that's okay.
That's the way I do my interviews.
I just get to edit mine.
I guess we talked about the imagery and the question that has to be asked, and I'm sure people are skirting around it.
Here you are at the ADA, and it's kind of mildly ironic that in the same complex as Newt Gingrich, you know, who's doing a talk tomorrow, we know where he stands on the issue of
public broadcasting, and I wonder, any comment?
I mean, you talk about the need for his firm, recognizing and helping and nurturing poets, artists, whatever.
Any comment?
Well, Gingrich, I'm afraid, represents a kind of dark populism in American life, the fear of the artist, the fear of anything public.
He and his allies are
on a crusade against almost everything public in America, public lands, public libraries, public art, public broadcasting, public libraries.
And that kind of dark populism has an angry edge to it that I see in Gingrich, and it reflects itself in his taking aim out of the public institutions in our country.
I regret that.
I'm saddened by that.
he would allow everything to be determined by market forces only.
And the sad truth is, no commercial television station, not even a cable station, would ever put a series on poets—put on a series on poets, if it weren't for public broadcasting, which is designed to—public broadcasting, which with all of its flaws—and we have many—is nonetheless
The servant of goods the market will not deliver.
If it were for public broadcasting, you wouldn't have the language of lying.
Now, there are no public funds in this.
I raised the money from private sources.
You must make that point clear.
The money, there's not a penny of public money in this series.
The money came from Mutual of America, an insurance company, which understands the value of promoting the strategy of affirmation.
affirming what's good in our society, the MacArthur Foundation, and the Gerbischhausen Foundation.
So I raised the money from the private sector, and fortunately there is a public delivery system which recognizes the importance of language and the value of
of this kind of community, and they will do it.
But if New Gingrich has its way, there will be no place for the language of life.
As you pointed out, this has been made possible by private support, but also, as you pointed out, it will be broadcast on public broadcasting stations, many of which get some support.
Yeah.
They are the delivery system.
It's the kind of thing that would fill this thing up.
Yeah, this would be...
the series on the power of poetry, the significance in poetry, the applicability of poetry, all of this stuff that would be denied, I guess.
I'm not trying to direct you in any way.
Obviously, it's under his agenda.
Under his agenda, corporations, media conglomerates will determine what the American people get to hear and see and watch.
He would turn this all over to
the tycoons of the media.
You know, about 26 corporations own most of the newspapers and television stations in America.
Tell me, I'm trying to get myself into it.
It's amazing when you see 2,200 newspapers out there.
It's not 2,200 individual newspapers.
No.
You know, you start fooling around with Gannett and all these others, and they really learn the personality of each one.
And what a great joy it is to run across an independently owned newspaper like the South Bend Tribute.
There are not many.
There are not many left.
And how wonderful it is, you know, to find a register guard and a chain.
Well, nice.
The Blade and Toledo.
I don't mean to be into my stuff, but it's the same stuff.
I don't have a watch.
You'll have to tell me how we stand.
And by the way, I've got about five more minutes.
Gingrich will sell a lot of books because the right-wing radio shows are his propaganda machine, and they will push, push, push his books.
I'm sure they will.
We're talking $4.5 million.
And the Christian Coalition will make sure that there are a lot of books bought.
That's the way they sell Russian Paul's books.
I'm sure.
I mean, I can't imagine that this is an Oliver North book.
It is.
Let's see.
I know you're a busy man.
I appreciate you doing this.
It means a lot to me and to this cause.
It's good for me.
And I think that in addition to the papers that take me every week, I am able to go out and do spot things.
And I do have the list of the
in the cities that are broadcasting.
Good.
Well, use anything from the introduction as if we talked about if you want to.
And I guess is there anything that stands out in your mind?
I mean, was there anything truly revelatory for you personally in any of these?
The power of the performing poet.
I hadn't seen much poetry performed when I was growing up.
My teachers in high school and college would read poetry to us, but they were reading the poems of poets, not their own poems.
And I read poetry a lot, but I've rarely had the chance to see poetry performed the way it is in the series.
It's powerful when you have poetry accompanied by the blues or jazz or the didgeridoo, which is an aborigine instrument brought from Australia.
And when Sekou Sandiata performs,
he has an accompanist on the didgeridoo, and the sound, the coupling of language and music creates a wholly new experience, epiphany, in the viewer and the listener.
That was a discovery to me.
That, that, that, that, my answer to what said to me in an interview, poetry is music written for the human voice, and you see it's also written for the human ear.
Well, one of you, one of the
people that you interview, actually, I forget which one, but she says, I think it's a woman, she actually hears the, you hear the rhythms before you have the words.
Yeah, hear the music before the words.
Which is very interesting, isn't it?
I know I love Shakespeare, and it's almost like going to an opera.
You don't have to, generally speaking, no matter how many times I've read the plays, I have to read a play again before I go see it, just because it's very difficult, I think, to just go cold into it.
But even if you don't know what's going on, the
Poetry is just so magnificent, and it is like going through an opera.
Sound has a meaning, apart from the words themselves.
What we hear is often, like great music, the sound affecting our unconscious.
So that sometimes you don't even understand what a poet is saying, but you know the poem.
is speaking to you.
Don't ask me how that happened.
It does happen, though.
And quickly, what's next for Bill Moyes?
We're going to start production on two series.
One is called Genesis, and it will be a ten-part series on the stories of Genesis, the stories of the Bible, with some of the most interesting people in the country who spend a lot of time thinking about the book of Genesis.
These old stories still resonate.
They still have
powerful meaning in our time today.
So sometime late next year, I'll have a 10-part series on PBS on the book of Genesis.
Are you going to do this in the field there?
It's going to be discussion, really, interviews.
And finally, how are you enjoying the NBC thing working?
I'm starting production on one other thing, and that's a five-part series called The Healing Arts, which will be a sequel to Healing in the Mind, which was a successful series I did and a good book.
And it will look at how the arts, music, poetry, painting, dance, drama, all play a role in our individual and social well-being.
How am I enjoying NBC?
Well, I've taken leave of NBC because two months after I was there, the old, I began to have some symptoms that had happened prior to my bypass surgery.
And so I went to the doctor and he gave me all the tests and he said,
You need to go into a three-month cardiac rehabilitation program, which I'm in right now, four days a week, three hours a day.
And I've taken leave in D.C.
while I'm doing that.
Thank you, sir.
My pleasure.
Would you kindly inscribe this for me?
You bet.
I'll have to ask my wife.
Well, that's fine.
It's beautiful.
Bye.